Add docs for how to enable pg_hint_plan (#344)
pganalyze/pganalyze-docs: query-tuning/enabling_pg_hint_plan.mdx

---
title: 'Enabling pg_hint_plan'
backlink_href: /docs/query-tuning
backlink_title: 'Query Tuning'
---

`pg_hint_plan` is a PostgreSQL extension that offers the possibility to tweak
PostgreSQL execution plans using so-called "hints" in SQL comments.

This can help you guide the planner to pick or avoid specific execution plans,
which is useful for tuning queries.

## Installing and enabling (Self-managed)

For self-managed servers, install `pg_hint_plan` either by building a binary

> module from the code, or from a binary package for Debian or Ubuntu.

Reviewer: Should we document `rpm`-based systems as well? It looks like the package there is called `pg_hint_plan_<postgres version>`.

Author: Sounds good, I updated and added that version too (also tested that it works)

Below is an example of installing `pg_hint_plan` from a binary package:

<CodeBlock language="bash">
{`sudo apt install postgresql-<postgres version>-pg-hint-plan`}
</CodeBlock>

You don't need to run `CREATE EXTENSION` for `pg_hint_plan` unless you plan to
use the hint table (in most cases, you won't need it).
You can load it for testing with the `LOAD 'pg_hint_plan'` command (for the
current session), or via `shared_preload_libraries` (to enable it globally).

## Installing and enabling (Cloud providers)

> For the cloud providers, the extension is usually available so you don't need to
> do a special thing to install.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For cloud providers, the module is usually available so no separate install step is required.
```

> To enable `pg_hint_plan`, each provider has slightly different ways, however the
> basic flow is the same. Add it in `shared_preload_libraries`, restart, then run

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each provider has a slightly different way to enable `pg_hint_plan`, however the
basic flow is the same. Add it in `shared_preload_libraries`, restart, then run
```

`CREATE EXTENSION pg_hint_plan;`.

### Amazon RDS for PostgreSQL or Amazon Aurora PostgreSQL

> * Add `pg_hint_plan` to the `shared_preload_libraries` by tweaking the parameter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add `pg_hint_plan` to `shared_preload_libraries` by tweaking the parameter
```

group
  * See the [the troubleshooting document about pg_stat_statements](/docs/install/troubleshooting/rds_pg_stat_statements_shared_preload_libraries)
    for how to tweak the parameter group
* Restart the instance to apply the change
* Run `CREATE EXTENSION pg_hint_plan;`

### Google Cloud SQL

* Set the `cloudsql.enable_pg_hint_plan` flag to `on`
  * See [Configure database flags](https://cloud.google.com/sql/docs/postgres/flags)
    Google Cloud SQL documentation for how to set flags
* Save the change and restart (automatically triggered as the change requires restart)
* For Google Cloud SQL, no need to run `CREATE EXTENSION`

### Azure Database for PostgreSQL

* Allowlist the `pg_hint_plan` extension by adding `PG_HINT_PLAN` to the
  `azure.extensions` parameter in the Server Parameters page
  * See [Enabling pg_stat_statements](/docs/install/azure_database/01_configure_azure_instance#enabling-pg_stat_statements)
    section for how to tweak the server parameters

> * Load `pg_hint_plan` by adding `PG_HINT_PLAN` to the `shared_preload_libraries`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Load `pg_hint_plan` by adding `PG_HINT_PLAN` to `shared_preload_libraries`
```

---
title: 'Enabling pg_hint_plan'
backlink_href: /docs/query-tuning
backlink_title: 'Query Tuning'
---

`pg_hint_plan` is a PostgreSQL extension that offers the possibility to tweak

> PostgreSQL execution plans using so-called "hints" in SQL comments.

Reviewer: I know "extension" is coming straight from the release notes, but technically Postgres makes a distinction between "modules" (loaded by `shared_preload_libraries` and related GUCs, taking advantage of Postgres hooks to effect changes in behavior of the server) and "extensions" (which create catalog objects like tables, views, and functions). Many extensions require their own modules for some functionality (e.g., auto_explain). Some modules enable additional functionality through an extension (e.g., pg_hint_plan).

I would prefer to use "module" and not "extension" here to avoid muddying the terminology, but I could be convinced.

This can help you guide the planner to pick or avoid specific execution plans,
which is useful for tuning queries.

> ## Installing and enabling (Self-managed)

Reviewer: I think the order is fine, especially since this is a much shorter section.

</CodeBlock>

## Installing and enabling (Cloud providers)

For the cloud providers, the extension is usually available so you don't need to
do a special thing to install.

To enable `pg_hint_plan`, each provider has slightly different ways, however the
basic flow is the same. Add it in `shared_preload_libraries`, restart, then run
`CREATE EXTENSION pg_hint_plan;`.

### Amazon RDS for PostgreSQL or Amazon Aurora PostgreSQL

* Add `pg_hint_plan` to the `shared_preload_libraries` by tweaking the parameter
group
  * See the [the troubleshooting document about pg_stat_statements](/docs/install/troubleshooting/rds_pg_stat_statements_shared_preload_libraries)
    for how to tweak the parameter group
* Restart the instance to apply the change
* Run `CREATE EXTENSION pg_hint_plan;`

### Google Cloud SQL

* Set the `cloudsql.enable_pg_hint_plan` flag to `on`
  * See [Configure database flags](https://cloud.google.com/sql/docs/postgres/flags)
    Google Cloud SQL documentation for how to set flags
* Save the change and restart (automatically triggered as the change requires restart)
* For Google Cloud SQL, no need to run `CREATE EXTENSION`

### Azure Database for PostgreSQL

> * Enable `PG_HINT_PLAN` in the Server Parameters page

Author: Need to add to `shared_preload_libraries`
